Anthony Lowenstein is a journalist and
author of The Palestine laboratory and
he's joining us live from Sydney always
good to have you with us on alaz Anthony
so Israel knows that taking control
keeping control of these key parts of
Gaza cannot be acceptable to Hamas or to
Egypt so why is it insisting on
this because it can and because the US
really Biden and frankly carela Harris
have not really put any serious pressure
on isra frankly since October 7 last
year I don't think Washington would want
a regional War which I think the lack of
a ceasefire in Gaza threatens that
possibility that it's quite much more
likely that Iran or Hezbollah and Israel
get involved in a serious Regional
catastrophe but without any kind of
serious pressure on Israel to actually
remove troops I noticed in your comment
a minute ago you say that Anthony
blinkin who was in the region said that
the the US is opposed to any kind of
long-term Israeli presence in Gaza well
they say the same thing about the West
Bank and here we are 57 years on and
it's hardly temporary it's permanent and
I think what you see here really um that
I'm feeling and hearing more and more is
that what Israel is doing here is
similar to Oslo Oslo was negotiated for
years decades ago creeping creeping
negotiations while at the same time the
occupation of the West Bank deepened and
grew this is a very similar situation in
Gaza where without massive pressure on
Israel to actually forcibly remove any
kind of military presence in Gaza you
will not see 10,000 settlers suddenly
appearing in Gaza but you might see some
outposts of radical right-wing jury
settlers that is quite likely because
the government in Israel that's what
they want but the International
Community could not would not allow
Israeli settlers back into Gaza would
they well would they I mean the question
is when one talks International
Community that really is one country
which essentially is the US I mean much
of the world virtually the entire world
in fact is against what's happening in
the West Bank for over half a century
and firstly I think you will find not
not small support within Israel itself
for some kind of So-Cal Israel would
call it a security buffer it's an
occupation the idea of separating the
North and the South of Gaza where Israel
potentially has control the north some
form of Palestinian group and it's Hamas
or Palestinian Authority controls the
South with hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians if not more I mean the idea
that the world would not accept this I
think my feeling is there was an
interesting piece written in the last 24
hours by the editor of haret the Israeli
newspaper essentially saying that
netanyahu's thinking the Israeli
government's thinking is that yes the
world's outrage they express opposition
to what this potentially means
occupation but that pressure will go the
world will move on and no one's going to
care now I think people will care and
there'll be pressure from from Civil
Society boycotts divestments Etc But
ultimately will there be actual pressure
from say a Harris presidency or a trump
Administration and Israel is betting
that they will not
be do you think then that the ceasefire
negotiations that are starting again in
Cairo today most people as you're
describing including the families of
captives being in being held in Gaza
don't think that Netanyahu is willing to
compromise to get a ceasefire done so
what then is trying to do by keeping the
negotiations
going like I said before you drag out
negotiations with the illusion of
believing in some kind of outcome when
you know that your opposition Hamas is
almost impossible to accept they're not
going to accept that kind of condition
now obviously we don't know exactly what
was discussed between Anthony blink and
Netanyahu But ultimately again there is
no serious pressure on Israel to relent
I do not see it I haven't heard it for
10 plus months and ultimately without
that pressure the idea of endless
negotiations it is possible it is
possible that there's some agreement
struck where some hostages are released
from Hamas captivity and some
Palestinians are also released from
Israeli jails but the desire from Israel
which they've made very clear is the war
continues at the end of that period
because they want to maintain that
military presence in Gaza and again
within Israel itself there's very little
opposition to that there are some
Israelis of course who oppose it to be
sure but not huge amounts of people they
don't there are people who want the
hostages back in Israel totally
understandably of course but ultimately
there is no serious International
pressure yet from frankly the Arab
countries most of them from the US from
the EU actual pressure not verbal
pressure economic pressure threatening
weapons you know ending arms sales to
Israel none of that
what will it what will it take to change
that because if that doesn't change
there can there can be nothing to help
the Palestinians in Gaza can
there I'm not saying that there is no
hope I think Civil Society has been
totally um empowered frankly in the last
10 months and in many states there is
going to be huge pressure on countries
to either cut uh some kind of economic
ties arms ties I see for example in grow
growing amounts of countries there's
massive pressure on super enation funds
to cut ties with Israeli companies I'm
not suggesting for a second there's no
hope that's not what I'm saying what I'm
saying is that politically without
massive pressure in the US particularly
on a incoming Harris Administration or
even the Trump Administration this will
not change and that because the world
has essentially accepted more than half
a century of occupation of the West Bank
we on the precipice of the world
potentially an inverted commas accepting
an occupation of Gaza unless there is
massive pressure on Israel to stop it
Anthony Lowenstein thank you as always
for your analysis we appreciate
it thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer